README.md, before:

> [!CAUTION]
> For anyone looking at this repo:
>
> This code is not guaranteed to work. We applied insignificant fixes after this to make this work. We strongly advise any ECE482 students not to follow any part of the codebase.
>
> Although these fixes are not really related to the well-functioning of this database at macro-scale, it does **strongly** affect 482 grades. So please, do not copy the code.

# Disclaimer: The author team are exempted from all Honor Code responsibilities. Anyone reads this repo should be fully aware of and be fully responsible for the result of any type of honor code violations. DO NOT copy any code from this repo without permission from the author team, and DO NOT use this repo as a reference for your own project. This repo is only for the purpose of showcasing the work of the author team, and is not intended to be used as a reference for any other project.

<p align="center">
  <h1 align="center">LemonDB</h1>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/language-C%2B%2B20-blue.svg" alt="Language">
  </a>
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/build-CMake-green.svg" alt="Build">
  </a>
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg" alt="License">
  </a>
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/style-clang--format-green" alt="Code Style">
  </a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>A high-performance, multi-threaded in-memory database engine built for speed and concurrency.</strong>
</p>

<br/>

**LemonDB** is a modern C++20 database management system designed to maximize throughput on modern multi-core architectures. By leveraging table-level parallelism, asynchronous execution, and intra-query parallelization, it delivers exceptional performance for analytical workloads while maintaining a simple, SQL-like interface.

## Table of Contents

- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Performance](#performance)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Features & Functionality](#features--functionality)
- [Developer Guide](#developer-guide)
- [Roadmap](#roadmap)
- [License](#license)

## Quick Start

Get LemonDB running in under 30 seconds.

### 1. Build
```bash
git clone <repository-url> lemondb && cd lemondb
cmake -S . -B build && cmake --build build -j$(nproc)
```

### 2. Run Interactive Mode
```bash
./build/bin/lemondb
```

### 3. Execute Your First Query
```sql
-- Create a table and insert data
LOAD data/sample.tbl; 
-- Run a parallel aggregation
SELECT ( id salary ) FROM sample WHERE ( id < 100 );
SUM ( salary ) FROM sample;
QUIT;
```

## Architecture

LemonDB adopts a **shared-nothing architecture** for table management combined with a **work-stealing thread pool** for query execution.

```mermaid
graph TD
    Client[Client / Input] --> Parser[Query Parser]
    Parser --> Scheduler[Async Scheduler]
    
    subgraph "Execution Engine"
        Scheduler -->|Dispatch| TableQueue1[Table A Queue]
        Scheduler -->|Dispatch| TableQueue2[Table B Queue]
        
        TableQueue1 --> Worker1[Worker Thread 1]
        TableQueue2 --> Worker2[Worker Thread 2]
        
        Worker1 -->|Parallel Task| ThreadPool[Global Thread Pool]
        Worker2 -->|Parallel Task| ThreadPool
    end
    
    ThreadPool -->|Result| Output[Output Buffer]
```

### Key Architectural Highlights

| Component | Implementation Details | Performance Benefit |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Table-Level Parallelism** | Dedicated execution queues per table. | Queries targeting different tables execute simultaneously without lock contention. |
| **Intra-Query Parallelism** | Automatic data chunking for aggregations (`SUM`, `COUNT`, `MAX`). | Massive latency reduction for large datasets by distributing work across cores. |
| **Asynchronous Execution** | Non-blocking parsing and scheduling loop. | Maintains high system responsiveness even during heavy workload spikes. |
| **Custom Thread Pool** | Optimized worker management avoiding OS overhead. | Maximizes CPU utilization and minimizes context switching costs. |

## Performance

*(Benchmark results comparing LemonDB against single-threaded baselines will be added here.)*

### Reproducing Benchmarks

To reproduce the performance benchmarks on your local machine:

```bash
# Generate benchmark data (requires python3)
./scripts/generate-benchmark-data.sh

# Run the benchmark suite
./build/bin/lemondb --threads $(nproc) --listen benchmark/query.sql
```

## Project Structure

```text
lemondb/
|-- src/                # Source code
|   |-- db/             # Database engine core (Table, Database)
|   |-- query/          # Query parsing and execution logic
|   |-- threading/      # Thread pool and concurrency management
|   `-- utils/          # Utility functions and helpers
|-- include/            # Public headers
|-- test/               # Integration and unit tests
|-- scripts/            # Build and utility scripts
|-- hooks/              # Git hooks for code quality
`-- CMakeLists.txt      # Build configuration
```

## Features & Functionality

### Robust Query Support

- **Data Manipulation**: `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, `SELECT`
- **Table Management**: `LOAD`, `DUMP`, `TRUNCATE`, `COPYTABLE`, `DROP`
- **Aggregations**: `SUM`, `MIN`, `MAX`, `COUNT` (Parallelized)

### Flexible Execution Modes

- **Interactive Mode**: Real-time query execution via standard input (not allowed in production mode).
- **Batch Mode**: Execute complex, multi-step scripts using the `LISTEN` command.

### Advanced Debugging Support

Built-in CMake integration for modern sanitizers ensures code stability and safety:

- **AddressSanitizer (ASan)**: Detects memory corruption and buffer overflows.
- **MemorySanitizer (MSan)**: Identifies uninitialized memory reads.
- **ThreadSanitizer (TSan)**: Detects data races in concurrent execution.
- **UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer (UBSan)**: Catches undefined behavior at runtime.

## Developer Guide

We welcome contributions! Please refer to our **[Developer Guidelines](https://focs.ji.sjtu.edu.cn/git/ece482/p2team01/wiki/Developer-Guidelines)** for comprehensive coding standards and contribution rules.

### Contributing

This project adheres to:
- **[Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org)** for commit messages.
- **[Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org)** for release management.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **For Contributors:**
> Please install the git hooks to ensure commit message compliance and code quality:
> ```bash
> ./hooks/install-hooks.sh
> ```

### Building with Sanitizers

```bash
# AddressSanitizer (ASan)
cmake -S . -B build -DENABLE_ASAN=ON

# ThreadSanitizer (TSan)
cmake -S . -B build -DENABLE_TSAN=ON
```

### Running Tests & Static Analysis

```bash
./test/run.sh                   # Run test suite
./scripts/run-static-analysis.sh # Run clang-tidy & cppcheck
```

## Roadmap

- [x] Core Database Engine (Tables, Pages, Rows)
- [x] SQL-like Query Parser
- [x] Multi-threaded Execution Engine
- [x] Parallel Aggregation Functions

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Docs: update notes for future 482

README.md, after:

> [!CAUTION]
> For anyone looking at this repo:
>
> This code is not guaranteed to work. We applied insignificant fixes after this to make this work. We strongly advise any ECE482 students not to follow any part of the codebase.
>
> Although these fixes are not really related to the well-functioning of this database at macro-scale, it does **strongly** affect 482 grades. So please, do not copy the code.

> [!NOTE]  
> For future ECE482 Students:
>
> The initial provided codebase is flawed in CQ. Fix codequality (or at least keep CQ in mind) rather then implmenting features on startup.
>
> You may find some of my other repos a good starting point if the professor does not provide you with CI/CD.
>
> RAII is important concept, wrap resources and locks in RAII wrappers/smart pointers.
>
> Sanitizers are helpful: Thread Sanitizers joined with what you met in p1 will help you a lot.
>
> Do not only think about huge tables, think about mini tables where the main overhead comes from threading.

# Disclaimer: The author team are exempted from all Honor Code responsibilities. Anyone reads this repo should be fully aware of and be fully responsible for the result of any type of honor code violations. DO NOT copy any code from this repo without permission from the author team, and DO NOT use this repo as a reference for your own project. This repo is only for the purpose of showcasing the work of the author team, and is not intended to be used as a reference for any other project.

<p align="center">
  <h1 align="center">LemonDB</h1>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/language-C%2B%2B20-blue.svg" alt="Language">
  </a>
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/build-CMake-green.svg" alt="Build">
  </a>
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg" alt="License">
  </a>
  <a href="#">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/style-clang--format-green" alt="Code Style">
  </a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>A high-performance, multi-threaded in-memory database engine built for speed and concurrency.</strong>
</p>

<br/>

**LemonDB** is a modern C++20 database management system designed to maximize throughput on modern multi-core architectures. By leveraging table-level parallelism, asynchronous execution, and intra-query parallelization, it delivers exceptional performance for analytical workloads while maintaining a simple, SQL-like interface.

## Table of Contents

- [Quick Start](#quick-start)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Performance](#performance)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Features & Functionality](#features--functionality)
- [Developer Guide](#developer-guide)
- [Roadmap](#roadmap)
- [License](#license)

## Quick Start

Get LemonDB running in under 30 seconds.

### 1. Build
```bash
git clone <repository-url> lemondb && cd lemondb
cmake -S . -B build && cmake --build build -j$(nproc)
```

### 2. Run Interactive Mode
```bash
./build/bin/lemondb
```

### 3. Execute Your First Query
```sql
-- Create a table and insert data
LOAD data/sample.tbl; 
-- Run a parallel aggregation
SELECT ( id salary ) FROM sample WHERE ( id < 100 );
SUM ( salary ) FROM sample;
QUIT;
```

## Architecture

LemonDB adopts a **shared-nothing architecture** for table management combined with a **work-stealing thread pool** for query execution.

```mermaid
graph TD
    Client[Client / Input] --> Parser[Query Parser]
    Parser --> Scheduler[Async Scheduler]
    
    subgraph "Execution Engine"
        Scheduler -->|Dispatch| TableQueue1[Table A Queue]
        Scheduler -->|Dispatch| TableQueue2[Table B Queue]
        
        TableQueue1 --> Worker1[Worker Thread 1]
        TableQueue2 --> Worker2[Worker Thread 2]
        
        Worker1 -->|Parallel Task| ThreadPool[Global Thread Pool]
        Worker2 -->|Parallel Task| ThreadPool
    end
    
    ThreadPool -->|Result| Output[Output Buffer]
```

### Key Architectural Highlights

| Component | Implementation Details | Performance Benefit |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Table-Level Parallelism** | Dedicated execution queues per table. | Queries targeting different tables execute simultaneously without lock contention. |
| **Intra-Query Parallelism** | Automatic data chunking for aggregations (`SUM`, `COUNT`, `MAX`). | Massive latency reduction for large datasets by distributing work across cores. |
| **Asynchronous Execution** | Non-blocking parsing and scheduling loop. | Maintains high system responsiveness even during heavy workload spikes. |
| **Custom Thread Pool** | Optimized worker management avoiding OS overhead. | Maximizes CPU utilization and minimizes context switching costs. |

## Performance

*(Benchmark results comparing LemonDB against single-threaded baselines will be added here.)*

### Reproducing Benchmarks

To reproduce the performance benchmarks on your local machine:

```bash
# Generate benchmark data (requires python3)
./scripts/generate-benchmark-data.sh

# Run the benchmark suite
./build/bin/lemondb --threads $(nproc) --listen benchmark/query.sql
```

## Project Structure

```text
lemondb/
|-- src/                # Source code
|   |-- db/             # Database engine core (Table, Database)
|   |-- query/          # Query parsing and execution logic
|   |-- threading/      # Thread pool and concurrency management
|   `-- utils/          # Utility functions and helpers
|-- include/            # Public headers
|-- test/               # Integration and unit tests
|-- scripts/            # Build and utility scripts
|-- hooks/              # Git hooks for code quality
`-- CMakeLists.txt      # Build configuration
```

## Features & Functionality

### Robust Query Support

- **Data Manipulation**: `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, `SELECT`
- **Table Management**: `LOAD`, `DUMP`, `TRUNCATE`, `COPYTABLE`, `DROP`
- **Aggregations**: `SUM`, `MIN`, `MAX`, `COUNT` (Parallelized)

### Flexible Execution Modes

- **Interactive Mode**: Real-time query execution via standard input (not allowed in production mode).
- **Batch Mode**: Execute complex, multi-step scripts using the `LISTEN` command.

### Advanced Debugging Support

Built-in CMake integration for modern sanitizers ensures code stability and safety:

- **AddressSanitizer (ASan)**: Detects memory corruption and buffer overflows.
- **MemorySanitizer (MSan)**: Identifies uninitialized memory reads.
- **ThreadSanitizer (TSan)**: Detects data races in concurrent execution.
- **UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer (UBSan)**: Catches undefined behavior at runtime.

## Developer Guide

We welcome contributions! Please refer to our **[Developer Guidelines](https://focs.ji.sjtu.edu.cn/git/ece482/p2team01/wiki/Developer-Guidelines)** for comprehensive coding standards and contribution rules.

### Contributing

This project adheres to:
- **[Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org)** for commit messages.
- **[Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org)** for release management.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **For Contributors:**
> Please install the git hooks to ensure commit message compliance and code quality:
> ```bash
> ./hooks/install-hooks.sh
> ```

### Building with Sanitizers

```bash
# AddressSanitizer (ASan)
cmake -S . -B build -DENABLE_ASAN=ON

# ThreadSanitizer (TSan)
cmake -S . -B build -DENABLE_TSAN=ON
```

### Running Tests & Static Analysis

```bash
./test/run.sh                   # Run test suite
./scripts/run-static-analysis.sh # Run clang-tidy & cppcheck
```

## Roadmap

- [x] Core Database Engine (Tables, Pages, Rows)
- [x] SQL-like Query Parser
- [x] Multi-threaded Execution Engine
- [x] Parallel Aggregation Functions

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
